Crypto module
=============

> This document is a part of **Nessuno** documentation which has received consistent contribution 
> especially on the cryptographic module by Artem Fliunt 

This is a documentation for `Crypto` module of **Nessuno** . It describes
the process of creation of the protocol message packet and security
implications of a cryptographic design behind it

Table of Contents
-----------------

 1. [Message Packet Structure](#message-packet-structure)
    1. [General Structure](#general-structure)
       * [`(0) CONTENT` Block](#0-content-block)
       * [`(1) HMAC` Block](#1-hmac-block)
       * [`(2) HEADER` Block](#2-header-block)
    

Message Packet Structure
------------------------

The message packet is a structure that represents an encrypted message that is
sent from one user of **Nessuno** protocol overlay to another. The size of the
packet can be of variable length though some of its parts are always remaining
constant (`(1) HMAC` block, local blocks of `(2) HEADER` etc).

A general structure of the message packet generated by Nessuno is described below together with
some security implications.

### General Structure

The illustration below is a high-level overview of **Nessuno** message packet:

```
---------------------------------------
|            |          |             |
| (2) HEADER | (1) HMAC | (0) CONTENT |
|            |          |             |
---------------------------------------
```

The indices from right to left are motivated by the order in which message
packet is constructed. A basic description of each block is as follows:

 - `(0) CONTENT` - encrypted with AES-128-CBC timestamped message with
     prepended plaintext IV (initialization vector).
 - `(1) HMAC` - hash-based message authentication code of a
     `(0)` block. The underlying hash function is SHA-1.
 - `(2) HEADER` - encrypted with public key of a recipient using RSA-OAEP
     encryption algorithm meta-information about a message along with keys
     generated for blocks `(0)` and `(1)`.

Below is a more detailed description of content of each block of the message
packet.

#### (0) Content Block

The content block encapsulates the message being sent and time stamp of when it
was composed. Concatenated together they are encrypted with a uniformly at
random chosen encryption key (128 bit) of AES-128-CBC cipher.

The IV (128 bit) for AES-CBC encryption is also generated uniformly at random.
The concatenation of the time stamp and the message is padded with
PKCS#7 padding scheme.

The resulting `(0) CONTENT` block looks the following:

```
---------------------------------------------------
|        | .................................(100) |
|        | . **************************(10).      |
|   IV   | . * (1) time | (0) content *    .      |
|        | . **************************    .      |
|        | .................................      |
---------------------------------------------------
```

To create a valid content block the following steps to be performed (

 1. Get message to send from a user `(0)`
 2. Get current UTC time in a format `YYMMDDhhmmssZ` (complies with ASN.1
    UTCTime type) `(1)`
 3. Concatenate `(1)` and `(0)` yielding `(1)|(0)`
 4. Pad `(1)|(0)` according to PKCS#7 standard to get block `(10)`. At this
    stage block `(10)` should be strictly a multiple of AES block size (which
    is 128 bit).
 5. Generate a random 128 bit value which is an AES-128-CBC key for this
    message packet. The key generated is used **only 1 time** to encrypt the
    current message only. Each new message must be encrypted with randomly
    generated fresh AES key.
 6. Generate a random 128 bit value which is an initialization vector for
    this encryption procedure only. Each new message must be encrypted with
    randomly generated fresh IV.
 7. Encrypt block `(10)` with AES-128 in CBC
    mode using
    the key and the IV generated during steps 5-6. The result is a block
    `(100)`.
 8. Prepend block `(100)` with IV used for encryption (generated on step 6).
    After that the full `(0) CONTENT` block was constructed.



#### (1) HMAC Block

This block encapsulates a hash-based message authentication code for the block
`(0) CONTENT`. The hash function of choice is SHA-1.

To produce a correct HMAC for a block `(0) CONTENT` the following steps are
necessary:

 1. Generate a random 160 bit bytestring which is a key to use for this HMAC
    calculation. Every new message must utilize a random and fresh HMAC key.
 2. Calculate an SHA1-HMAC of `(0) CONTENT` block with a key from step 1. The
    result is the `(1) HMAC` block.

#### (2) Header Block

The header block is an encrypted container for keys used in previous blocks as
well as some extra meta-information that facilitates protocol operation.

The encryption is performed using RSA algorithm with a key length of at least
1024 bits complying with RSAES-OAEP standard. The content of a block is padded with
OAEP.

Both encryption and optional signing are made according to RSAES-OAEP and
RSASSA-PSS (respectively) standards of PKCS#1

The header would not fit into one block of RSA ciphertext therefore it has to
be split into several blocks that are padded and encrypted separately.
Currently used mode is ECB (which should not cause any information leak because
of probabilistic padding used).

It's advisable to split header in such a way that signature block `(20)` content
is also into several blocks.

The structure is as follows:

```
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
|******************************************************************************(200)|
|*        |          | +++++++++++++++++++++++++(20) |            |           *     |
|* (4) IS | (3) S_ID | + (2) H(k_hmac | k_aes) +     | (1) K_HMAC | (0) K_AES *     |
|*        |          | +++++++++++++++++++++++++     |            |           *     |
|******************************************************************************     |
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
```

These steps are necessary to produce a valid header block:

 1. Concatenate keys that were used in `(1) HMAC` block and `(0) CONTENT`
    blocks. The first one is the key used to calculate an HMAC. The second one
    is a key used in AES encryption. The local blocks `(1)` and `(0)` are ready.
 2. Calculate a SHA-1 hash from the result of step 1. Pad hash with PSS padding
    according to RSASSA-PSS standard. This yields a local block `(2)`.
 3. Sign local block `(2)` produced in the previous step with RSA private key
    of a sender. The signature is a local block `(20)`. Prepend result of the
    step 1 with the it.
 4. Prepend the result of the previous step with a the SHA-1 hash of the sender's public key.
 5. Prepend the result of the previous step with a 4-byte indentification
    string `(4)`: *NESS*. This value is used to determine a successful decryption
    of a header block on a side of the recipient.
 6. **Note** that the result of the previous step would not fit into a single RSA
    block therefore it has to be split into several blocks. Pad each block of
    header according to
    OAEP
    padding standard complying with RSAES-OAEP.
 7. Encrypt the result of the previous step (each block separetely) with RSA
    using public key of the recipient. Concatenate resulting ciphertext blocks
    which is a local block `(200)` and itself is a full `(2) HEADER` block.

Note that *steps 2-4 are optional* and can be omitted depending on a sender's
decision. Though it would not allow the recipient to verify the identity of the
sender in any way. It still allows the recipient to decrypt a message.

If there is not actual signature in the header blocks `(3)` and `(20)` should
be filled with a random data.

The minimal required size of RSA keypair for both sender and recipient is
1024 bits. The recommended size of RSA keypair is at least 2048 bits.
